Once around,
Pock. Pock is one of the two bright
stars in the constellation of Gemini,
the heavenly twins, Caster and Pock. And
Pock gets the designation of being the
beta star, beta Geminorium. With a
magnitude of
1.14, it's actually brighter though than
Alpha Caster by about half a magnitude.
And you can see them in the diagram on
the right hand side at the heads of the
two stick diagram men representing the
twins. And there's something strange
about that that they're the wrong way
round. It happens in other
constellations usually when one of the
stars is much lower in the sky than the
other and the atmospheric extinction
caused by the dirt and dust low down
towards the horizon gets involved. But
these two are quite high up and they're
also so close together that I don't
really understand why they've got this
one the wrong way round. Interesting. I
wonder if there was a change in the
brightness of the stars between uh the
measurements or something like that. We
hard to know. So Pollock itself, well
it's classed as a red giant. That really
refers to the technical state of the
inside of it where it has exhausted its
supply of hydrogen fuel in its core and
that's become a ball of inert helium and
hydrogen fusion is only going on further
out now in an expanding shell around the
dead nuclear core. And that outer
expanding shell has a larger surface
area. So the total amount of heat
escaping from the shell is greater and
that drives the outer layer of the star
to expand
outwards. So we see it as orange. It's a
K type classification K0 with a
temperature of
4,666 Kelvin. And that's hotter than
your typical red star which would be
3,000 or so but cooler than the sun
which is 5,800.
But the mass of this object is 1.9 times
that of the sun and the radius n times.
Now they used to think the radius was
even larger. They had it when it was
first analyzed at 18 times the radius.
But nine times means nine times in all
three directions. So you have to cube n
you get 729 times the volume. That's
amazing given that you've only got twice
the mass. So it's not very dense at all.
And some people have described the outer
layers of these stars as almost a hot
vacuum. They're so thin. Of course, in
the core, where all the nuclear fusion
is going on and where that dense ball of
helium is right in the center, it's a
different story with all the overlying
material. And you got a lovely picture
there of an artist's view
of pollock compared to the size of the
sun at nine times the
radius. But it's younger than the sun.
It's only 1.2 two time billion years
old, that's uh four times younger, a
quarter of the sun's age
roughly. And that's an indication that
being double the mass, it has raced
through its available fuel. It might
have double the mass and therefore have
twice as much fuel, but it's burnt it
about six times faster and therefore
it's turned into a giant after only a
billion years or so and hasn't got long
before it will exhaust its available
fuel
completely. But as a giant star, it's
not particularly large. Here's a
comparison of the sun, Sirius Pollock,
and Arcturus, another orange giant.
So there are much much larger stars even
than Arcturus out there. The the red
giants and the red super giants are
enormous by comparison. This makes Pock
really rather a tiny star even though
we're classifying it as a giant and even
though it is nine times the radius of
the sun. It's also quite close to us
though. This is why we see it as so
bright just 34 light years away. And
that makes it a record holder. is the
nearest giant star to the
[Music]
sun. Originally, it would have been an A
type star, a white star, much hotter
than the sun due to that larger mass.
And but then, of course, it burned
through the fuel six times faster and
ran out and swelled to be a giant star,
cooling its outer layers and puffing
them outwards in the process.
It's got a companion, at least we think
it has. It's given the designation
Pollock B, but it's now been named
Thesius. And Thesius is the patronym of
leader. Leader was the daughter of
Thesius. And unfortunately, although
that was suggested by a public um vote
for the name for this
planet, it had already been used for an
asteroid and indeed for one of Jupiter's
moons. So, it' been used twice already.
They didn't want to use it a first third
time. So, they came up with Thesius, the
patronymic of Thesius. And uh that seems
fair to me.
This was originally suspected back in
1993, but it took till 2006 using the
full radial velocity method of looking
for the wobble of the parent star caused
by the gravity of this planet moving
around it. And that's difficult because
this is in a quite long orbit, 590 days,
so over a year getting on for two years
to do a lap. But it is quite a large
planet, 2.3 times the mass of Jupiter.
So with an orbit 1.64 times as far from
Pock as we are from the sun, 1.64
astronomical units. And the fact that
the total power output from Pock itself,
the main star, is 32.7 times as much as
we get from the sun. So although it's
cooler, it has that much larger surface
area. In fact, 81 times the surface
area 4 pi r 2 being the formula. So 9^ 2
81 times as uh much area to emit light
but doing less of it per unit area
because it's cooler works out to 32.7
overall. That makes perfect sense.
So if we work out how much heat that
planet B is receiving compared to the
Earth, we take 32.7 and divide by the
square of the ratio of the distances. So
1.64 squared and I've done that and it
works out at
12.2 times as much. So there's a lot
more heat
arriving. And from that we can use the
Stefan Boltzman law. I like this. we
take the power times uh well set that to
be equal to the fourth power of the
temperature times a constant called
Stephan Boltzman constant sigma there.
So 12.2 * the power we would get 12.2 to
the power of a quarter as
much temperature as the earth and 12.2
to the^ of a quarter is just 1.87 by my
calculations.
So if we take the temperature of the
earth which is
-8 C before any greenhouse effect in
fact without any greenhouse effect we'd
all be freezing. It's bringing it up
from -8 to about 20. So a 38 degree rise
and of course what we're worried about
is that that'll become a 40 rise. But
anyway it's
255 Kelvin. We have to use Kelvin in
this calculation. And so if we take that
multiply by 1.87 we get 477 Kelvin which
is 24 centigrade. So this would be uh
more than boiling and uh then you would
have to add any greenhouse effect. And I
would have thought that with uh a large
planet 2.3 times the mass of Jupiter you
would have a significant amount of gases
in the atmosphere to boost it. So I'm
going to give this the designation
pretty hot.
But is it really there? Well, we're not
absolutely sure. It's certainly been
called into question because in studying
the star
Pollocks, we discovered a
660day rotation period for the star. And
you might say, well, that's not 590,
which is the supposed orbit of the star.
But of course, one of the features of
stars is that not all of the star
rotates at the same rate. In fact, our
sun, you typically find that the center
of the sun, the equatorial regions are
going around much faster than the polar
regions carrying sunspots that are near
the equator so that they overtake ones
that are further towards the pole. And
we think this is a common feature of all
stars, all gas giant planets, just
physics at work really. And so it may
well be that what we have been detecting
with the
590 is in fact just related to the
rotation of the star at all. So maybe
Pock B isn't there after all. And I
await developments on this one. I'm very
interested to see if it comes out to be
true or not. So, thanks very much for
listening and I hope you've enjoyed a
little tiny tour once around Pollocks.